U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)                              modflow-usg(1)

NOTE: Any use of trade, product or firm names is for descriptive 
      purposes only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. 
      Government.

NAME
     modflow-usg - Modular unstructured three-dimensional finite-
               difference ground-water model

ABSTRACT
     A new version of MODFLOW, called MODFLOW–USG (for UnStructured 
     Grid), was developed to support a wide variety of structured and 
     unstructured grid types, including nested grids and grids based on 
     prismatic triangles, rectangles, hexagons, and other cell shapes. 
     Flexibility in grid design can be used to focus resolution along 
     rivers and around wells, for example, or to subdiscretize 
     individual layers to better represent hydrostratigraphic units. 
     MODFLOW–USG is based on an underlying control volume finite 
     difference (CVFD) formulation in which a cell can be connected to 
     an arbitrary number of adjacent cells. To improve accuracy of the 
     CVFD formulation for irregular grid-cell geometries or nested 
     grids, a generalized Ghost Node Correction (GNC) Package was 
     developed, which uses interpolated heads in the flow calculation 
     between adjacent connected cells. MODFLOW–USG includes a 
     Groundwater Flow (GWF) Process, based on the GWF Process in 
     MODFLOW–2005, as well as a new Connected Linear Network (CLN) 
     Process to simulate the effects of multi-node wells, karst 
     conduits, and tile drains, for example. The CLN Process is tightly 
     coupled with the GWF Process in that the equations from both 
     processes are formulated into one matrix equation and solved 
     simultaneously. This robustness results from using an unstructured 
     grid with unstructured matrix storage and solution schemes. 
     MODFLOW–USG also contains an optional Newton-Raphson formulation, 
     based on the formulation in MODFLOW–NWT, for improving solution 
     convergence and avoiding problems with the drying and rewetting of 
     cells. Because the existing MODFLOW solvers were developed for 
     structured and symmetric matrices, they were replaced with a new 
     Sparse Matrix Solver (SMS) Package developed specifically for 
     MODFLOW–USG. The SMS Package provides several methods for resolving 
     nonlinearities and multiple symmetric and asymmetric linear 
     solution schemes to solve the matrix arising from the flow 
     equations and the Newton-Raphson formulation, respectively.


METHOD
     The ground-water flow equation is solved using the finite-difference
     approximation.  The flow region is subdivided into blocks in which
     the medium properties are assumed to be uniform.  In plan view the
     blocks are made from a grid of mutually perpendicular lines that may
     be variably spaced.  Model layers can have varying thickness.  A 
     flow equation is written for each block, called a cell.  A sparse 
     matrix solver is provided for solving the resulting matrix problem; 
     the user can choose the best solver for the particular problem.  
     Flow-rate and cumulative-volume balances from each type of inflow 
     and outflow are computed for each time step.


HISTORY

      MODFLOW-USG Version 1.2.00 03/21/2014 -- Added a transient IBOUND
         option and an IA-JA input option for the CLN Process.  These and
         other minor changes are described in release.txt.
         

      MODFLOW-USG Version 1.1.00 08/23/2013 -- Added bi-conjugate 
         gradient stabilized acceleration method for the pcgu linear solver.  
         Added free format option for the STR Package.  See release.txt for
         a full description of the changes.
         

      MODFLOW-USG Version 1.00.00 05/03/2013 -- First release.


DATA REQUIREMENTS
     In order to use MODFLOW-USG, initial conditions, hydraulic 
     properties, and stresses must be specified for every model cell in 
     the finite- difference grid. Input data are read from files.


SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
     MODFLOW-USG is written in Fortran 90 with some Fortran 2003 
     extensions. The code has been used on personal computers running 
     various forms of the Microsoft Windows operating system.


FUNTIONALITY
     This version of MODFLOW-USG includes the following functionality that is
     documented in Panday and others (2013).

         BAS -- Basic Package
         BCF -- Block-Centered Flow Package
         LPF -- Layer-Property Flow Package
         HFB -- Horizontal Flow Barrier Package
         CHD -- Time-Variant Specified-Head Option
         RIV -- River Package
         DRN -- Drain Package
         WEL -- Well Package
         GHB -- General Head Boundary Package
         RCH -- Recharge Package
         EVT -- Evapotranspiration Package
         STR -- Streamflow-Routing Package
         FHB -- Flow and Head Boundary Package
         SUB -- Subsidence Package
         SFR -- Streamflow-Routing Package
         LAK -- Lake Package
         GAG -- Gage Package
         SMS -- Sparse Matrix Solver Package


DOCUMENTATION


  The basic documentation for MODFLOW-USG is contained in:

Panday, Sorab, Langevin, C.D., Niswonger, R.G., Ibaraki, Motomu, and 
Hughes, J.D., 2013, MODFLOW–USG version 1: An unstructured grid version 
of MODFLOW for simulating groundwater flow and tightly coupled processes 
using a control volume finite-difference formulation: U.S. Geological 
Survey Techniques and Methods, book 6, chap. A45, 66 p.

  The basic documentation for MODFLOW-2005, which contains information for
  many of the packages in MODFLOW-USG, is contained in:

Harbaugh, A.W., 2005, MODFLOW-2005, the U.S. Geological Survey modular
ground-water model -- the Ground-Water Flow Process: U.S. Geological Survey
Techniques and Methods 6-A16, variously p.

  The STR Package is documented in:

Prudic, D.E., 1989, Documentation of a computer program to simulate
stream-aquifer relations using a modular, finite-difference, ground-water
flow model: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 88-729, 113 p.

  The FHB Package is documented in:

Leake, S.A., and Lilly, M.R., 1997, Documentation of a computer program
(FHB1) for assignment of transient specified-flow and specified-head
boundaries in applications of the modular finite- difference ground-water
flow model (MODFLOW): U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 97-571, 50 p.

  The SUB Package is documented in:

Hoffmann, Jorn, Leake, S.A., Galloway, D.L., and Wilson, A.M., 2003,
MODFLOW-2000 ground-water model -- User guide to the Subsidence and
Aquifer-System Compaction (SUB) Package: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File
Report 03-233, 46 p.

  The SFR Package is documented in:

Prudic, D.E., Konikow, L.F., and Banta, E.R., A new Streamflow-Routing
(SFR1) Package to simulate stream-aquifer interaction with MODFLOW-2000:
U.S. Geological Survey Open File Report 2004-1042, 95 p.

Niswonger, R.G., and Prudic, D.E., 2005, Documentation of the
Streamflow-Routing (SFR2) Package to include unsaturated flow beneath
streams -- a modification to SFR1: U.S. Geological Techniques and Methods
Book 6, Chapter A13, 47 p.

  The LAK Package is documented in:
  
Merritt, M.L., and Konikow, L.F., 2000, Documentation of a computer
program to simulate lake-aquifer interaction using the MODFLOW ground-water
flow model and the MOC3D solute-transport model: Water-Resources
Investigations Report 00-4167, 146 p.

  The GAG Package is documented as part of the above SFR and LAK
  documentation.


CONTACTS
    U.S. Geological Survey
    Office of Groundwater
    411 National Center
    Reston, VA 20192
    (703) 648-5001
    ogw_webmaster@usgs.gov

    See

      http://water.usgs.gov/software/ordering_documentation.html

    for information on ordering printed copies of USGS publications.
